The Journey Begins
==================

tags

:   musings

category

:   musings

date

:   2018-08-31

Welcome, and thanks for joining me on my maker journey. My intention is
to write about the stuff that interests me as I re-immerse myself in
making stuff. I know electronics and microcontrollers
([CircuitPython](https://www.circuitpython.org/),
[Arduino](https://www.arduino.cc/), etc.) are going to be a major focus.
I want to learn to use the cool tools in my local Makerspace: [3-D
printer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/3D_printing), [laser
cutter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laser_cutting), [CNC
router](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CNC_router). What else might be
included? We'll find out as we journey together.

Since I'm starting afresh, I thought I'd talk about my journey as a
maker, and what brought us together in this little corner of cyberspace.

My history with making things is long and complicated. It's ironic, in a
way, because making stuff is something that runs in my family. Some of
my earliest childhood comfort memories are tied to the smell of sawdust
and my grandfather's workshop with him. My grandmother spun wool and
knit and wove fabric, and my mom's been knitting for as long as I can
remember. I have multiple published writers in my family.

Since I was small, I was forever taking things apart to try to
understand how they worked. I took a machine shop class in 8th grade and
an electronics class in my sophomore year of high school. I designed and
built a darkroom timer for the photo darkroom I made in my dad's
basement. Heck, I've made my living in the software and high tech
industry for most of my adult life.

But then, although I retained my interest in building and making and
creating things, I drifted away from pursuing it. I stopped making
things.

Why? Because of all the people who told me "that's not something girls
are interested in." Sometimes when I did try, it was "I'd be glad to
help you with your project -- what are you wearing right now?" Sometimes
it was "here are 30 questions about your knowledge while I
condescendingly explain the basics to you and treat you like crap,
because it's clearly not possible for girls to know anything about
this." Often, I was simply ignored and excluded.

The messages were clear, unambiguous, and invalidating: People can be
makers or women, but not both. And if I dared to try, what was in store
for me was invalidation, condescension, disbelief, and sexism. Message
received, loud and clear. For far too long and in too many parts of my
life, I internalized those messages and took them to heart and let them
become barriers. For far too long, I let society's sexist messages
squelch my desire to create, to build, to MAKE.

And you know what? All of that is garbage. There are TONS of women,
nonbinary people, and men who build stuff. Who know how to use tools.
Who weld, who run a CNC mill and a 3-D printer. Who create robots and
electronic stuff and mechanical gizmos. Just look at [E. Louise
Larson](http://louiselarson.com/) (Prototype), [Limor
Fried](https://www.adafruit.com/about) (Adafruit), or [Gina
Lujan](https://hackerlab.org/en/directory/profile/24535519/gina-lujan)
(Hacker Lab).

So, I'm going to learn the skills I want to learn, explore, create,
make. I'm going to encourage other women, non-binary people, kiddos, and
really everyone to follow your passions and interests wherever they
lead, with reckless abandon. And I'm emphatically and unequivocally
rejecting all that ridiculous and toxic gender stereotyping and norm
setting. It's nonsense, and I refuse to play. If I want to learn how to
make things out of wires and circuits, or metal, or wood, or use a laser
cutter, I'm not letting "girls can't" or "girls shouldn't" stand in my
way. Not ever again.

What do I want to create? Right now, I just want to learn about the
universe of what's possible. All engines, ahead full!
