Of Emacs and Tools
==================

category

:   tools

tags

:   emacs, text editors, tools

date

:   2020-03-01

For those who aren't familiar,
[Emacs](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/) is a text eeditor - and
much more. First created in 1976, Emacs is built - and extensible - in
the [Lisp](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lisp_(programming_language))
programming language. And this gives it an enormous amount of power.
People have extended Emacs to include e-mail and newsgroup
functionality, full-featured IDEs for programming, even [an outlining
solution](https://orgmode.org/) that's become a life organizer and
document publishing tool.

I've been using Emacs on-and-off for decades, and I've recently been
getting *org-mode* set up for both organizing my life and for some
writing projects. I'll be blogging more about that, but that's not what
I want to talk about today. Today my thoughts are about the tools we use
--- hardware, software, and otherwise --- and about tool wars. a When I
was in college (more years ago than I care to admit) Linux was in its
infancy. Home computers were just starting to join the Internet, and a
lot of us that used [Unix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix)-based
computers did so through a command--line interface and a dial-up
terminal program. Back then, which text editor you used --- Emacs or
[vi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vi) --- was a topic of debate,
argument, and sometimes holy war.

Though the tech landscape has changed enormously since then, one of the
continuing dynamics I still see is people arguing fervently online about
which tool is "the best". Python vs. Ruby vs. CLojure vs. whatever other
programming language. Arduino vs. CircuitPython vs. C/C++. The best USB
soldering iron. The right soldering station. The perfect 3-D printer and
the One True slicing and modeling choices. But I think these arguments
all miss the point.

Frankly, I don't believe there's One True Choice for any tool. I keep
coming back to Emacs because I've been using it for nearly 30 years. For
me, it's comfortable, like a well-worn pair of jeans. That doesn't mean
I use it exclusively -- I'm fairly comfortable with
[vi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vi) and
[TextMate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TextMate) and
[SublimeText](https://www.sublimetext.com) too. I think
[VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com) is fantastic and use it
regularly. 3-D modeling software? I have
[FreeCAD](https://www.freecadweb.org) and
[OpenSCAD](https://www.openscad.org) and [Fusion
360](https://www.autodesk.com/products/fusion-360/overview) and use them
all.

In short, I'm a big fan of picking the right tool for the job **and the
user**. What does that look like? For me, the right tool is:

1.  *The tool that has the capability to do what you need it to.*
    Ideally without requiring you to use it in ways it wasn't well
    designed for. You *can* pound a nail with the side of a chainsaw
    (but you might break the chainsaw). You *can* make a tree fall down
    if you hit it with a hammer enough times. That doesn't mean those
    are the right tools for those jobs. This is why my grandfather had
    so many different hammers and saws in his workshop -- he was a big
    fan of having exactly the right tool for each job.
2.  *The tool that gets out of your way.* This doesn't mean it
    necessarily just works out of the box. I've done a lot of tweaking
    and coding to make Emacs work the way I want it to. But when I'm in
    the groove, writing a blog post or hacking on code or capturing
    notes from a meeting? In those moments I don't want to have to think
    about the tool. I just want it to enable me to do what I need to.
3.  *The tool that you feel comfortable with.* This is the big one. I
    remember being in my Grandpa's workshop with him as a small child.
    He was working on something and had a large, heavy hammer out. One I
    could barely lift. So he had a smaller, lighter hammer in the shop
    too. That was *my* hammer, and when I wanted to build something he'd
    bring it out. He never argued that his hammer was the One True
    Hammer, that I should just suck it up and use that one. The right
    tool for me wasn't the right tool for him -- and that's okay. That's
    why there are many different tools.

As I said, I'm going to be doing some blogging about Emacs in amidst my
other writings. If you use Emacs, hopefully they'll be of interest. But
if not, if you use other tools you're happy with? That's totally fine.
Tools are the means to an end, not the end in and of itself. (At least,
not unless tool-building *is* the end you're working toward).

Use what enables you to get the thing done. At the end of the day, that
is the true bottom line.
