Yes, Yes, Another Reboot\...
============================

date

:   2022-01-21

category

:   musings

tags

:   administrivia, musings

author

:   tammy

Yes, yes, I know...another year, another blog reboot. So, where have I
been, and what's been going on?

Suffice it to say that 2021 was a *wiiiiiiild* ride for me. Aside from
the continuing aftermath of the pandemic (which included a layoff from
my employer of nearly seven years and starting a new job), 2021 included
a rather serious health crisis. Or, as I like to put it, I survived an
assassination attempt perpetrated against me by my body.

You know those pharmaceutical ads that say \"\"rare but serious side
effects have been reported\"\"? I had one of those one-in-a-million rare
side effects to a relatively widely used and generally safe medication,
and it very nearly killed me. My Primary Care Provider's first words
when he saw the hospital records? \"I\'ll be really honest, I'm not sure
how you were conscious to call 9-1-1. With these lab numbers, you should
have been in a coma.\"

But, after three days in the ICU and six months of hard work, I'm happy
to report that my health has stabilized. In fact, with regard to one of
my chronic health conditions, I'm in a much better place now than I've
been in years. And with the realization of just how very close I came to
dying, I'm realigning my focus and priorities, and doing a lot of things
I've been wanting to do for a long while. More making, more writing,
more music. And yes, blogging again, hopefully on a more regular
cadence.

I have a bunch of other fun stuff planned for 2022, about which more to
come.

I\'m also switching my blog engine again, from
[Cryogen](https://cryogenweb.org/) to
[Pelican](https://blog.getpelican.com/). I\'m doing a lot more Python
stuff, both personally and professionally, these days, and it just
seemed a better fit for my needs right now.

There's lots more to come, including migrating my old content to the new
site and writing about some exciting new projects I've got going on. So
stay tuned!
